Hello everybody and welcome to this lecture where all we can to learn about constraint.
That's why our bones have gone green.
If we go ahead here and grab the top arm we can see that it's constrained it won't go any further than
the top here heavy drag it down it won't go any further than that even if we try and even better if
we highlight the bottom one and trauma rotate that round we see that it is locked to that axis as well
which is really useful but not only that the top one follows with it.
Now these can be a little tricky to get your head round at first but let's dive into blender and find
out more okay everybody welcome back.
So let's first of all my car work just a little bit easier by giving ourselves some more information
that we don't currently have.
If we make sure that we're impose mode or certainly just looking at our armature itself so we can go
to the armature properties.
If we scroll down that are viewport display that we've played with before what we need to do is put
a tick in the axis checkbox.
When we've done that we get some information that we couldn't see before.
Now you will notice that that doesn't necessarily align with the world axes and that can cause some
confusion.
But we've got options for that when we have a look at the constraints.
Let's go back into pose mode so we can start moving the bones around once we've done that again over
on the properties panel if we scroll down.
We've got an option here to constrain the bones themselves.
There is another one further up that's just object constraints but we don't want that.
We want the one with the little icon of the bone going through it.
Now it would be good at this point to select the object that we want to add are bone constraints to
only the bone that we once added to.
And we've got two bones that we can start playing with.
Now if we had a bone constraint there are a ton of different options as you can see here.
We might use some other ones of these later on it be quite awesome if we had the lamp tracking something
across the scene and we can do that with these type of constraints.
Now what we can do here is limit its rotation.
That's what we're really focused on.
We want it to be able to move.
So that's important but we want it to be constrained on how far it can actually rotate.
So if we go to limit rotation we can see there that the bone goes green.
Now we can limit x y and z so we can rotate it and limits in those three axes.
However this is being converted from world space at the moment.
So if we go ahead and limit the X it will fall flat on its side.
But if we increase let's just make this area here a bit larger so we can see it's as M. Max if we increase
the maximum all the way up and beyond 90 you'll see that it was actually facing up this way.
But the constraint itself said nope you cannot do that.
And forces the bone to lay flat.
So this is really confusing at first because this would mean you'd have to have a limit of a minimum
the maximum of 90 to stop it flopping around.
And if we pressed the Aki twice we can still see it's got some degrees of freedom on other axes.
So again you can limit it on the y axis.
The interesting here is it doesn't flop over which is quite useful.
And now if we try and rotate it spins around freely on the world or the global z axis.
And you may want to constrain that you may want to say that you want it minus ninety two plus 90 and
then when we try and rotate it it will go one way and then another.
But interestingly when you try and use your axes locks you have to use the bone axes lock so you have
to press Y here to lock it into position and you can see there it won't go any further either way.
And that's the sort of movement that we want.
However it would be much much better if we were working with the bones axes themselves rather than the
world ones because you're going to end up with bones that don't line up with the world at all like this
one here world is going to start to become very confusing when the axes are not aligned.
So what we can do is instead of using world space we've got a couple of other options.
I'm going to skip over pose and local with parents and go straight to local space.
Course it's going to flop over at this point so let's remove our limits and think about them again.
So I'm going to set these back to zero even though they grayed out.
You can still work with them.
So let's have a look at our local axes for this particular bone.
We've got Y Z and X and I'd like you to think for a few moments which one do we need to constrain the
movement of okay.
If you said Why then you're correct.
So let's go ahead.
Let's limit X and limit Z.
We should find now that it will spin around freely and take the one above with us with it.
Excellent.
So we just need to now lock why as we did X before to minus 90 plus 90 assuming we want that 180 degree
movement that we can have.
Now you'll notice that we start ending up with our model flipping backwards and forwards if you try
and go too far.
That's a situation called Gimbel lock.
Hopefully we will avoid that during our animations is just something you need to watch out for.
Now the top one here poses an interesting challenge because we need to lock kids whilst at the same
time allowing it to move along with this bone and that is going to be your challenge.
Okay so your challenge apply constraints to the lower arm bone that we've created.
Make sure the stem bone can move the lower arm and make sure the limits are natural and reasonable so
we don't want a lamp that's too stiff.
Equally we want one that can hyper extend and look silly when we're working with it.
And then finally test the changes one at a time.
It's very easy to get carried away and put lots of ticks and lots of boxes has lots of values only to
find that it's not working as you expected it to.
So as you lock one of the axes check and make sure it's doing what you think it should be doing.
So go ahead polls of the year now and apply constraints to the lower arm bone okay everybody welcome
back.
Let's go ahead now hop on over to blender and apply these constraints Hello everybody and welcome back.
So let's go ahead and grab our lower arm bone add a constraint too and we're going to limit its rotation.
So looking at this we could just see if we can limited in its world space.
What would that be.
Well we want it moving in just the X space so limit X that seems to work.
And if we limit the others as well.
Well let's not do them all at once.
So we've already played with this a minimum of nought and a maximum of 90.
Okay.
Let's see what happens.
Brilliant.
So we can move that up and down as expected and of course it moves in other directions as well.
So if we just limit both of those for a moment and go aha there we go it's going up and down it's being
a bit jerky all over the place as we push it round and back into itself.
But if we select this lower one and start rotating there the top one does not follow suit.
So how do we sort this out.
Well again it's to do with the space that you're working in world space.
In this case is not just it's just not going to cut it.
So if we go back to local space we find that it will follow along with everything else that we're doing.
Perfect.
And we need to work on the numbers.
Okay.
So limiting it and in this particular case a little tip for you going into your track ball type rotation
when you press the Aki twice really does highlight problems or it rotating somewhere where you don't
want it.
So it seems at the moment its current position is zero.
We cannot get to any further back from that and then it's maximum is 90.
I think that's what's going on here.
So if I lower the minimum to maybe minus 45 does that then lay flat.
Yes it does.
And then if we do this one at forty five is the maximum perfect.
That goes all the way up to the top.
I don't want to extending any more than that and no more than that going back now you might say that's
a bit too hyper extended and would damage the mechanism so maybe around 35 one direction and minus 35.
The other something like that.
Let's try that minus 35.
Oh let's type in the right number minus 35 and the maximum of 35.
These don't have to be exactly opposites but they're that looks a lot more natural.
I do think that having it all the way output causes issues but there we go that's all sorted.
Perfect.
How did you guys get L on applying your bone constraints to the bones themselves.
You will find that times that it can be a little bit picky but I do think that having these axes turned
on and working in the local space in this particular instance is going to save you lots of time and
effort trying to get everything working especially having your bones follow one another.
That's very important.
So that's it for this lecture please share your work over in the discussions share any quirkiness perhaps
something really amusing happened when you started linking things together and constraining them.
And I'll see you all over in the next lecture.